---
title: MLRUG
date: "01.01.2019"
slug: mlrug
excerpt:
    Experimented with generative algorithms to create Moroccan carpet designs,
    then brought them to life through traditional production in Morocco.
    Exhibited at Design Month Graz 2025.
coverImage: "/videos/projects/mlrug/mlrug-video.webm"
heroLocation: "contain"
stats:
    [
        { label: "Year", value: "2019 - 2025" },
        { label: "Type", value: "Personal Project" },
    ]
---

In the design theory lecture at my university, we often discussed the role of
machine learning algorithms and artificial intelligence in the design process.
One conclusion from this discussion was that generative algorithms will play an
increasingly important role in the design process, to the point where the role
of the designer could shift from creator to curator. However, these discussions
were all theoretical in nature, and I wanted to explore what that would mean in
practice. I wanted to carry out a project in which I experimented with
generative algorithms as a design tool, which led to a year-long experiment that
lasted from my time at university until today.

## Data Collection

<FloatImage
    direction="right"
    content={
        <ImageGallery 
            images={[
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_og1_abjily.jpg", alt: "Training data example - Moroccan carpet 1" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_og2_kntmvj.jpg", alt: "Training data example - Moroccan carpet 2" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_og3_zn2xem.jpg", alt: "Training data example - Moroccan carpet 3" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_og4_wuyclb.jpg", alt: "Training data example - Moroccan carpet 4" },
               ]}
        />
    }
>

I started this project a couple of years before many of the impressive AI tools
(Stable Diffusion, VEO, GPT-4, etc.) we have today existed. The only realistic
way for me to conduct this experiment was to train my own algorithm (based on
other people's algorithms, of course).

As with so many projects in the field of machine learning, one of the most
important considerations for me was the question of what data I would feed into
my generative algorithm. I wanted to choose a design object that I was
reasonably familiar with, for which I could obtain a sufficient amount of data,
and that could be represented as an image (since 3D generative design is much
more difficult). Based on these considerations, I opted for Moroccan carpets. I
am very familiar with Moroccan carpets because my father trades with them, which
also gives me access to image data of Moroccan carpets. I supplemented the data
I was able to obtain from my father with images from the internet, which I
collected using a web crawler. In the end, I was able to obtain about 3.000
images of Moroccan carpets. This is not a huge amount in the context of a
generative algorithm, but enough to get first reasonably useful results.

</FloatImage>

## Algorithm and Computing

I investigated various architectures and algorithms and finally settled on
HyperGAN. At the time, it was an appropriately powerful architecture for this
project and was specifically designed to lower the barrier to entry for artists
and designers. For my first test, I ran HyperGAN on my laptop, but I quickly
realized that my laptop's graphics card (GTX1050) would not be sufficient for a
full run.

So I turned to cloud solutions. In the process, I landed on Paperspace, which is
based on AWS but offers a simpler user experience and is optimized for machine
learning. There, I did a number of different training runs with my data, using
different resolutions and parameters. In the end, I found that HyperGAN's
default parameters and a resolution of 256x256 worked best for me.

## Initial Results

<FloatImage
    direction="left"
    content={
        <ImageGallery
            images={[
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_test1_q0ickq.jpg",
                    alt: "Initial AI-generated carpet design 1",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_test2_bsazdb.jpg",
                    alt: "Initial AI-generated carpet design 2",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_test3_tp3e7l.jpg",
                    alt: "Initial AI-generated carpet design 3",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/optimized_test4_w4wlpv.jpg",
                    alt: "Initial AI-generated carpet design 4",
                },
            ]}
        />
    }
>
    I wouldn't call the results perfect, but for the amount of data and
    technical knowledge I had at the time, I think they were reasonable. At this
    point, it's clear that training an algorithm on a small scale like this
    isn't really going to replace a designer's design process. But it can serve
    as inspiration. And it definitely did in this project.
</FloatImage>

## From Digital to Physical

When I first experimented with generative adversarial networks (GANs) in 2019, I
achieved only moderate results. However, the results improved significantly when
I revisited this project together with my sister Ida, who was working on her
master's thesis on the historical pattern development in Moroccan carpets. We
wanted to explore the parallels between the analog development and geographical
migration of traditional carpet patterns—which traveled across the Mediterranean
and blended influences from the Berbers, Arab nomads, Moorish Andalusians, and
Ottomans—and the digital pattern development processes of AI systems. Our goal
was to investigate whether the machine learning approach to pattern generation
can be viewed through the same lens as the centuries-old tradition of motifs
that have developed and spread from urban manufactories to rural communities and
back again.

<FloatImage
    direction="right"
    content={
        <ImageGallery
            images={[
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed0035.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 0035",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed0552.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 0552",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed2705.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 2705",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed3733.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 3733",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed3948.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 3948",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed4222.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 4222",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed5014.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 5014",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/seed5151.png",
                    alt: "StyleGAN2-ada generated carpet design - seed 5151",
                },
            ]}
        />
    }
>

For this second I reevaluated which algorithm to use and landed on
StyleGAN2-ada, a variant specifically designed for training with fewer images.
Using my father's high-quality photo archive again and this time supplemented by
much more carefully selected internet images, we achieved much better results
than in my first iteration. Showing how much machine learning had evolved in
such a short time (and how much of an effect good quality data can have).

</FloatImage>

## Production and Collaboration

<FloatImage
    direction="left"
    content={
        <ImageGallery 
            images={[
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-1.jpg", alt: "Carpet production process 1" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-2.jpg", alt: "Carpet production process 2" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-4.jpg", alt: "Carpet production process 4" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-5.jpg", alt: "Carpet production process 5" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-6.jpg", alt: "Carpet production process 6" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-7.jpg", alt: "Carpet production process 7" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-11.jpeg", alt: "Carpet production process 11" },
                { src: "/images/projects/mlrug/production-12.jpeg", alt: "Carpet production process 12" }
            ]}
        />
    }
>

The most exciting part of this collaboration with my sister and father was that
it brought me full circle, returning me to my original curiosity about using
machine learning as a tool in the design process by actually bringing these
digital creations back into the physical world.

Rather than choosing Indian or Nepalese manufactories with their precision
technology that would allow nearly photographic reproduction, we deliberately
opted for production in Morocco. The rhizomatic producer landscape there
consisting of many small, interconnected local businesses allowed us to maintain
the character and vitality of the original designs while ensuring value creation
remained in the country that inspired our work.

Working with a producer from the western Middle Atlas that my father had
collaborated with for several years, we were able to translate the
algorithmically generated designs into handcrafted rugs. The result was not a
mechanical reproduction but rather a living interpretation that preserved the
improvisational qualities that make Moroccan rugs special.

</FloatImage>

## Exhibition & trade magazine features

<FloatImage
    direction="right"
    content={
        <ImageGallery
            images={[
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-1.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 1",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-2.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 2",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-3.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 3",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-4.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 4",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-6.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 6",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-7.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 7",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-8.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 8",
                },
                {
                    src: "/images/projects/mlrug/exhibition-11.jpeg",
                    alt: "Exhibition view 11",
                },
            ]}
        />
    }
>

These algorithmically generated, curated and handcrafted rugs were presented as
part of Design Month Graz 2025.

The project gained recognition beyond the exhibition, being featured in two
articles in Cover, a leading publication in handmade carpets and textiles for
interiors.

This coverage positioned MLRug within important industry conversations about the
intersection of traditional craft and emerging technology. Lucy Upward's feature
article<sup><a href="#ref1">[1]</a></sup> explored the project's conceptual framework, examining how AI's
pattern-learning process mirrors the historical migration of motifs along
ancient trade routes. Meanwhile, Denna Jones's analysis<sup><a href="#ref2">[2]</a></sup> used MLRug as an
exemplary case study for ethical AI implementation in design, by keeping
production in Morocco and creating a purpose-built dataset to avoid copyright
concerns.

</FloatImage>

---

### References

<span style={{color: '#666', fontSize: '0.9em'}}>

<span id="ref1">[1]</span> Upward, L. (2025). Curiosity made the rugs. *Cover*, 79, 96-99.

<span id="ref2">[2]</span> Jones, D. (2025). Let's try to be clever about AI. *Cover*, 79, 100-103.

</span>
