---
title: MAAS Site Manager
date: "11.07.2024"
slug: maas-site-manager
excerpt:
    Designed the user experience of MAAS Site Manager from concept to MVP. Built
    workflows for IT professionals managing bare metal server infrastructure
    across multiple data center sites.
coverImage: "/images/projects/maas-site-manager/server-location-map-interface.webp"
heroLocation: "cover"
asciiDarken: 1.3
stats:
    [
        { label: "Year", value: "2023-2024" },
        { label: "Type", value: "Work Project" },
    ]
---

During my time at Canonical, I worked extensively with the MAAS team. MAAS
(Metal as a Service) is bare metal management software that can manage servers
even without, for example, an operating system installed. The users are deeply
technical IT professionals who manage large-scale infrastructure deployments.

I focused primarily on MAAS Site Manager, a companion application designed to
address a significant pain point for users managing multiple data centers. While
performance requirements dictate one MAAS installation per data center, this
creates operational challenges: users lack unified oversight of their
infrastructure, must replicate configurations and boot images across
installations, and frequently struggle to ensure they're performing actions on
the correct MAAS instance.

MAAS Site Manager was created as the solution. A centralized management
interface for multiple MAAS installations. I contributed to this project from
its inception, helping shape it from initial concept through MVP delivery.

## Geographic visualization challenge

One of the key features I designed for the MVP was the map visualization. Prior
user research revealed that users needed geographic awareness of their MAAS
installations to effectively manage distributed infrastructure. When
troubleshooting errors, they required quick identification of affected regions,
and when planning deployments, they needed visibility into data center locations
across specific geographic areas.

In this research we also found that a map visualization would be the most
intuitive solution for this geographic information. However, we also had a
critical constraint from product management: the feature needed to function in
air-gapped environments where internet connectivity is restricted or
unavailable. This requirement was a significant technical and design challenge,
as most mapping solutions depend on online services.

## Design process and constraints

I began the project by creating several iterations of wireframes, addressing
both visual and interaction design challenges. The map needed visual clarity for
the specific use case while enabling users to interact with sites: selecting
individual or multiple locations and performing actions on them.

![MAAS Site Manager wireframe showing European map with clustered server location markers, with dense clusters around Vienna area and scattered markers across other European cities, including sidebar navigation for Regions, Settings, and user account](/images/projects/maas-site-manager/site-manager-wireframe-clustered-markers.webp)

The design had to accommodate potentially tens of thousands of sites, requiring
scalable rendering solutions. Displaying 30,000 sites simultaneously would be
neither technically performant nor visually useful to users. I needed to create
user flows that were intuitive for site interaction and selection while ensuring
the interface could scale effectively.

![MAAS Site Manager wireframe displaying regional view of Europe with individual server location pins scattered across countries, showing '20 MAAS regions' with search functionality and map/table view toggles in the interface](/images/projects/maas-site-manager/site-manager-wireframe-regional-view.webp)

Throughout the design process, I conducted frequent feedback sessions with other
designers to refine flows and visual approaches, and with developers to validate
technical feasibility.

## Technical roadblock and alternative solution

During one of these developer feedback session, we identified a significant
technical challenge. Off-the-shelf open source map tiles (the building blocks of
digital maps) require tens to hundreds of gigabytes of storage. Shipping this
data with MAAS Site Manager would create an impractical burden for users,
particularly since most self-host the application.

![OpenStreetMap integration example showing detailed European map with country boundaries, city names, and geographical features like rivers and terrain, demonstrating the level of detail would be too much for MAAS Site manager](/images/projects/maas-site-manager/openstreetmap-integration.webp)

The development team proposed using an online map service like OpenStreetMaps to
avoid hosting large datasets, but this would violate one of the core
requirements, that it would work in an air-gapped environment. Beyond the
technical constraint, I had additional concerns with this approach: limited
control over visual appearance, excessive detail that could distract users from
their primary tasks, and visual inconsistency with our brand identity.

Having recently worked with map data on a personal project (detecting potential
new rock climbing areas using machine learning algorithms on satellite images),
I knew there was a better solution. While the development team was hesitant to
explore alternatives further, I decided to create a proof of concept
demonstrating how to build a map with sufficient detail for our specific use
case, custom styling that matched our brand, and dramatically reduced file size
(tens of megabytes instead of tens of gigabytes).

I achieved this by customizing the tile building process (with
[tippecanoe](https://github.com/mapbox/tippecanoe)), selecting only the map
features necessary for our bare metal server management use case. This approach
eliminated distracting details irrelevant to our use case while significantly
reducing map tile size.

After developing the proof of concept, I convinced the development team that
this approach was feasible. Using my prototype as a reference, they implemented
a proper system for generating optimized maps for our application.

## Results and validation

![Final MAAS Site Manager map interface showing clean, minimalist world map with numbered orange location markers indicating '155 MAAS sites' across different continents, featuring custom styling with branded orange pins and simplified geography](/images/projects/maas-site-manager/server-location-map-interface.webp)

The result was a successful map feature in MAAS Site Manager that displays the
appropriate level of detail, maintains visual consistency with our design
system, and functions in air-gapped environments without requiring internet
connectivity.

User testing with internal users validated the approach. Participants
successfully completed tasks without requiring additional map detail, and the
performance remained smooth due to the reduced file size. The map maintained
visual consistency with the application's styling and brand identity.

This project demonstrates how taking initiative to bridge the gap between design
requirements and technical constraints can lead to solutions that meet user
needs, business requirements, and brand standards simultaneously.
