---
title: Canonicals Design tokens
date: "11.07.2024"
slug: canonicals-design-tokens
excerpt: How I led implementation of design tokens at Canonical or something
coverImage: "/images/blog/figma-libraries/frame-419.png"
heroLocation: "cover"
stats:
    [{ label: "Year", value: "2024" }, { label: "Type", value: "Work Project" }]
---

Upon joining Canonical, I quickly identified that the design system—which at
that point was more accurately described as a CSS library—lacked a robust system
for its visual foundations. Rather than being systematically created, visual
foundations were developed on an as-needed basis, resulting in an inconsistent
and fragmented approach. More problematically, these visual foundations were
implemented directly in CSS code, creating a significant disconnect between the
source of truth (the code) and our design tools in Figma. This implementation
gap led to frequent mismatches between designs in the Figma libraries and the
actual code implementation. Design specifications often failed to match
production environments, leading to developer confusion and implementation
inconsistencies. As Canonical's product ecosystem continued to grow, it became
evident that this approach was neither sustainable nor scalable. As part of a
broader initiative to mature Canonical's design system, I advocated for adopting
design tokens to formalize our visual foundations. Design tokens would provide a
single source of truth that could be consumed by both design tools and code,
eliminating the synchronization issues we were experiencing. Once the team
decided to pursue this approach, I took the lead on the design tokens
initiative.

My first step was to create a comprehensive inventory of Canonical's existing
visual foundations and map the current flow of these foundations from variables
to their actual usage in components. Fortunately, I had a head start on this
task since I had recently built new Figma libraries, which required extracting
all visual information from the source code. This prior work gave me a solid
understanding of the current state and the challenges we needed to address.
While conducting this inventory, I performed extensive research on design
tokens. Despite their seemingly straightforward nature, implementing design
tokens properly is surprisingly complex. A significant portion of the challenge
lies in establishing naming conventions—a notoriously difficult and often
contentious process in larger organizations. Since design tokens are
fundamentally about creating a shared language for visual properties, getting
the naming right was critical to their success. Working with another designer, I
began drafting a specification for how we would structure and name design tokens
at Canonical. Similar to our Figma library process, we conducted discussion and
review sessions where we walked through the specification with designers and
developers, gathering feedback and making adjustments.

Through this collaborative process, we were able to reach agreement on the
taxonomy for design tokens at Canonical, covering naming conventions, token
organization, and processes for storing and updating them. With the taxonomy
established, we moved to writing specifications for specific design token
categories and their values. We started by defining primitives for each major
design token category, including colors, dimensions, and typography. During this
process, our visual and brand designers recognized an opportunity to refresh
some of the values, which slightly delayed the token implementation but
ultimately improved the design quality—a worthwhile tradeoff. Each category
specification outlined token-specific considerations and detailed the tokens and
their values. Following our established pattern of discussion and approval, we
implemented the agreed-upon tokens. While the work on primitive tokens is now
complete and can be found in our public repositories, the implementation of
semantic design tokens—which map primitive tokens to specific UI contexts—is
still in progress. This systematic approach to visual foundations through design
tokens has already created more consistency between design and implementation,
reduced developer confusion, and established a scalable foundation that will
support Canonical's design system as it continues to mature.
