---
title: Canonicals Figma libraries
date: "11.07.2024"
slug: canonicals-figma-libraries
excerpt:
    How I led the rebuilt of Canonicals Figma libraries, with practical
    guidelines on structure, performance, and maintenance processes.
coverImage: "/images/blog/figma-libraries/frame-419.png"
heroLocation: "cover"
stats:
    [{ label: "Year", value: "2024" }, { label: "Type", value: "Work Project" }]
---

The shoemakers' children have no shoes. At Canonical's Design team, this proverb
manifested in our Figma libraries. When I joined Canonical, I encountered a
Figma library ecosystem that had become severely outdated and inefficient. The
libraries were disorganized and contained material that was still under
development, making it unclear what components were production-ready. They were
also incomplete compared to our codebase, and existing components weren't
consistently maintained.

Contributing components to the official libraries faced significant barriers.
The process was unclear, and there was pushback when attempting to upstream new
components. This situation forced me to develop my own component sets to
maintain efficiency in my design workflow. Interestingly, these personal
components gained traction among my colleagues, who began adopting them instead
of the official libraries. This organic adoption validated the need for a more
streamlined, well-maintained component system.

Around the same time, Canonical formed a more institutionalized design systems
working group to address these systemic issues. Within this group, we
established a goal to completely rebuild our Figma libraries and share them
publicly on the Figma community. I took the initiative to lead this
comprehensive rebuilding effort.

The process began methodically with internal research on how designers used
components and what improvements they needed. I surveyed team members about
problematic components in the old libraries and organized meetings to understand
their specific needs. This research phase provided valuable insights into the
pain points and requirements for our new libraries.

Based on this research, I drafted an initial specification outlining how
Canonical's Figma libraries should be structured. This involved extensive
investigation into best practices for building scalable libraries. I explored
approaches from other design teams like Doctolib and examined articles on
library architecture by Nathan Curtis, particularly his concepts on design
system tiers and how they could apply to our diverse product ecosystem.

To ensure broad acceptance and create the most effective specification possible,
I organized collaborative review sessions where team members could discuss,
modify, and ultimately approve each section. We went through the entire document
together, debating different approaches to component organization, performance
optimization, and contribution processes. This collaborative approach resulted
in a thorough 20-page specification with strong team buy-in, creating a solid
foundation for the implementation phase.

With the specification approved, we moved to implementation. I led the building
process with support from junior designers. We adhered strictly to the
guidelines we had established, creating components that were not only visually
consistent but also performant and easy to use. I personally built most of the
components, ensuring they followed our performance guidelines regarding layer
count, asset optimization, and effect usage.

Before releasing the libraries more widely, I recognized that we needed better
metrics than what Figma natively provided to properly track adoption and
identify improvement opportunities. Figma's built-in analytics were insufficient
for our needs, so I developed a custom metrics tool, taking inspiration from
approaches shared by the Pinterest and Uber design teams in their public
materials. This custom tooling allowed us to track critical data points such as
component usage frequency, library adoption rates across teams, and component
detachment rates. The detachment rates were particularly valuable, as they
helped us identify which components designers were frequently modifyingâ€”a clear
signal that these components needed improvement in the official library.

After completing the initial library, we announced an internal transition period
during which both the old and new libraries would remain available. We
encouraged designers to start using the new components immediately while
providing enough time to adapt to the changes. We clearly marked the old
libraries as deprecated with notices in file names, page names, component names,
and descriptions, along with links to the new libraries. Throughout this
transition, our metrics tool provided valuable insights into adoption patterns,
helping us identify which teams were quickly embracing the new system and which
might need additional support.

By the end of the transition period, the metrics showed strong adoption across
the team. The detachment rates for components in the new library were
significantly lower than in the old system, indicating that designers were
finding the components more useful in their standard form. These metrics gave us
confidence that the libraries were thoroughly tested in real design workflows
and ready for public release. I advocated for sharing our work with the wider
design community, believing that our approach to library structure and
performance optimization could benefit others.

The culmination of this effort was the public release of our base core component
library and base assets library to the Figma community. These libraries now
serve as a testament to the structured, collaborative approach we took to solve
our design system challenges, and they provide a foundation for other design
teams facing similar issues.
