---
title: MAAS Anvil and Protostar
date: "11.07.2024"
slug: maas-anvil-and-protostar
excerpt: User research I did for MAAS Anvil. How I created protostar for it.
coverImage: "/images/blog/figma-libraries/frame-419.png"
heroLocation: "cover"
stats:
    [{ label: "Year", value: "2024" }, { label: "Type", value: "Work Project" }]
---

The digital infrastructure software that Canonical develops can be quite
challenging to set up and install. And so was MAAS (Metal as a Service) the
product I was working on at the time. Especially if you want to deploy MAAS in
high-availability (HA) (setting up 3 identical installations so if one fails
another one can take over) things can become tricky. Thats why the MAAS team
worked on a CLI tool that makes installing MAAS in HA easier. We were preparing
MAAS Anvil for a Beta release so we wanted to identify any significant usability
gaps beforehand. We also wanted to understand better how best to add new
features we were considering adding which had several implementation options,
but we weren't certain which experience would work best for our users.

I began by creating a comprehensive research brief outlining the purpose of the
study, the assumptions we wanted to test, and our methodology. After sharing
this with the team to ensure alignment on research objectives, I developed an
interview guide that would help us understand user behaviors and preferences.
During this process, I realized that testing different feature implementation
options would require some form of prototype.

## User testing CLIs

But the problem is that there aren't any good options for prototyping and user
testing command-line interfaces. Figma prototypes were inadequate because users
couldn't type actual commands, only click through predetermined paths. Simply
reviewing command structures in a document failed to provide the interaction
depth of a real CLI experience. And while coding a functioning CLI would be
technically possible, it would require participants to install software before
interviews. An immediate barrier when working with system administrators who are
understandably skeptical about installing unknown packages on their systems.
Ideally, the solution would be as frictionless as Figma prototypes, where
researchers can simply send a link to participants.

This prompted me to hack together a CLI prototypiong tool on my own on a friday
afternoon. I knew about xterm.js, a terminal library used by established apps
like Visual Studio Code. Is used it and other libraries to build a prototype
that emulated a terminal environment entirely in the browser, with no
installation required. Despite the prototype being a bit buggy, it worked
remarkably well in user research sessions. It allowed participants to interact
with the CLI naturally by typing commands, exploring different paths, and
providing feedback on the various implementation options we were considering.
The quality of user insights was substantially better than what we could have
achieved through static mockups or theoretical discussions.

## Sharing user insights

How I synthesized the findings and presented them to the team.

# Future of prototyping CLIs

After synthesizing and sharing the research findings with the team, I reflected
on the prototyping solution I'd created. The approach seemed valuable beyond our
immediate needsâ€”potentially helpful for other designers conducting CLI user
research or anyone needing to quickly prototype command-line experiences. This
led me to develop it further as an open-source prototyping tool and library
called Protostar. Protostar has already gained traction among designers at
Canonical who need to test CLI interfaces. It also got some attention when
Canonical's Design Director mentioned it during presentations on CLI design at
FOSDEM, generating interest from the open-source community. What began as a
practical solution to a specific research challenge has evolved into a
specialized tool that fills a genuine gap in the UX design toolkit, particularly
for those working with command-line interfaces.
