---
title: MLRUG
date: "15.01.2023"
slug: mlrug
excerpt:
    Experimenting with generative algorithms as a design tool to create Moroccan
    carpet designs using machine learning.
coverImage: "/videos/projects/mlrug/mlrug-video.webm"
heroLocation: "contain"
stats:
    [
        { label: "Year", value: "2023" },
        { label: "Type", value: "Personal Project" },
    ]
---

In the design theory class at my college, we often discussed the role of machine
learning algorithms and artificial intelligence in the design process. One
conclusion from this discussion was that generative algorithms will play an
increasingly important role in the design process, to the point where the role
of the designer might change from creator to curator. With that in mind I wanted
to do a project where I experiment with generative algorithms as a design tool.
Data As with so many machine learning projects, one of the biggest
considerations for me was the data I would feed my generative algorithm with. I
wanted to choose a design object that I was reasonably familiar with, could get
a sufficient amount of data, and could be represented as an image (since 3D
generative design from scratch is much more difficult). Through these
considerations I chose Moroccan carpets. I am very familiar with Moroccan
carpets, as my father deals with them, which also gives me access to image data
of Moroccan carpets. The data I could get through my father I supplemented with
images from the internet which I collected with a web-crawler. In the end I was
able to obtain about 3000 images of Moroccan carpets. This is not a huge amount
in the context of a generative algorithm, but enough to get reasonably useful
results. Algorithm and Computing I investigated various architectures and
algorithms and finally settled on HyperGan. At the time, it was an appropriately
powerful architecture for this project and was specifically designed to lower
the barrier to entry for artists and designers. For my first test, I ran
HyperGAN on my laptop, but I quickly realized that my laptop's graphics card
(GTX1050) would not be sufficient for a full run. So I turned to a cloud
solution. In the process, I landed on Paperspace, which is based on AWS but
offers a simpler user experience and is optimized for machine learning. There, I
did a number of different runs with my data, using different resolutions and
parameters. In the end, I found that HyperGAN's default algorithm and a
resolution of 256x256 worked best for me. Results I wouldn't call the results
perfect, but for the amount of data and technical knowledge I had, I think they
were reasonable. At this point, it's clear that training an algorithm on a small
scale like this isn't really going to replace a designer's design process. But
it can serve as inspiration. And it definitely did in this project. From Digital
to Physical What began as an experimental exploration evolved into a complete
design journey. In 2019, I trained my first models using generative adversarial
networks (GANs), achieving moderate results. The breakthrough came when I
revisited the project in collaboration with my sister Ida, who was exploring
pattern development in Moroccan carpets for her master's thesis. For this second
iteration, I chose StyleGAN2-ada, a variant specifically designed for training
with fewer images. Using my father's high-quality photo archive supplemented by
carefully selected internet images, we achieved surprisingly good quality
results that sparked interesting discussions about the parallels between how AI
learns compared to humans, and how this relates to the history of rug design in
Morocco. The most exciting development was bringing these digital creations back
into the physical world. Rather than choosing Indian or Nepalese manufactories
with their precision technology that would allow nearly photographic
reproduction, we deliberately opted for production in Morocco. The rhizomatic
producer landscape there—consisting of many small, interconnected local
businesses—allowed us to maintain the character and vitality of the original
designs while ensuring value creation remained in the country that inspired our
work. Working with a producer from the western Middle Atlas that my father had
collaborated with for several years, we were able to translate the AI-generated
designs into handcrafted rugs. The result was not mechanical reproduction but
rather a living interpretation that preserved the improvisational qualities that
make Moroccan rugs special. These AI-influenced handcrafted rugs will be
presented as part of Design Month Graz 2025, representing the fruitful interplay
between digital technology and traditional craftsmanship. The project has
deepened my understanding of AI's role in design—not as a replacement for human
creativity, but as a tool that can open new possibilities when used thoughtfully
and critically. Through this journey, I've come to a more nuanced view of AI in
design. While I remain technology-positive, I've become concerned about the
trend of designers completely delegating their thinking and creativity to AI
rather than using it to enhance their creative process. The best results come
from a balanced approach where AI serves as one tool among many in the
designer's toolkit.
